..
   Local Variables:
   ispell-local-dictionary: "en_GB"
   End:


.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   gatdoc/gatdocumentation
   catdoc/catdocumentation
   installation
   api


Growth Analysis Tool (GATHODE) and CLS Analysis Tool (CATHODE)
**************************************************************

The Growth Analysis Tool for High-throughput Optical Density
Experiments (GATHODE) is a software package for analysing time series
of optical density measurements that were recorded with the help of a
`plate reader <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plate_reader>`_. It allows
to extract growth parameters such as maximal growth rate, lag-time and
growth yield.

The Chronological Life Span is defined as the time cells can survive
in a non-dividing state. The Chronological life span Analysis Tool for
High-throughput Optical Density Experiments (CATHODE) uses multiple
output files of GATHODE to analyse this survival.


Both programs consist of the main analysis logic suitable for batch
processing, and a graphical user interface (GUI) that allows for quick
inspection of curves, adjustment of parameters and blacklisting of
outliers. They allow to export the data as figures or tables for
further processing and analysis.

.. image:: gatdoc/_static/screenshots/gatteaser.*
   :scale: 37%
   :alt: Screenshot of GATHODE

.. image:: catdoc/_static/screenshots/catproject.*
   :scale: 37%
   :alt: Screenshot of CATHODE


License and citation
********************

Growth Analysis Tool for High-throughput Optical Density Experiments
(GATHODE) and Chronological life span Analysis Tool for
High-throughput Optical Density Experiments (CATHODE) are released
under the terms of the `GNU Affero General Public License
<_static/LICENSE>`_.

If you use (parts of) this software in your research, we kindly ask
you to cite our publication *Jung P. P., Christian N., Kay D.,
Skupin A. and Linster C.L. 2015. Protocols and programs for
high-throughput growth and aging phenotyping in yeast. Accepted,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0119807*


Documentation
*************

To get started with GATHODE read :ref:`getting started
<gatgettingstarted>` of the :doc:`documentation
<gatdoc/gatdocumentation>`.

CATHODE is documented :doc:`here <catdoc/catdocumentation>`.


Download
********

The latest versions of GATHODE and CATHODE for Mac OS/X and Windows
will soon be made available for download.

To install the software from source check the :doc:`installation
instructions <installation>`. The source code is hosted at
`<https://github.com/platereader/gathode>`_.


Developing
**********

If you would like to extend the software or use it in your custom
workflow, read the :doc:`developer documentation <api>`.
