..
   Local Variables:
   ispell-local-dictionary: "en_GB"
   End:

.. _gatgettingstarted:

Getting started
===============

In this chapter we describe how to get started with the Growth
Analysis Tool for High-throughput Optical Density Experiments
(GATHODE).

Plan, run and export plate reader experiment
--------------------------------------------

First of all, when planning the experiment with your plate reader, you
should label the individual wells according to the scheme
:samp:`{sample}_{condition}` (note the underscore ``_``), where
replicates should contain exactly the same labels. This way GATHODE
will later be able to automatically group replicates in order to
extract the mean and variance of various properties (e.g. maximal
growth rate). You should also label the empty wells, used to subtract
the background optical density (OD) from the samples' OD, according to
the scheme :samp:`background_{condition}`.

Example: Assume you are growing the yeast strains FY4, W303-1A and
Sigma1278b under two conditions, `minimal` (YNB) and `rich` (YPD)
media, then the labelling could look like this

* FY4_YNB
* FY4_YPD
* W303-1A_YNB
* W303-1A_YPD
* Sigma1278b_YNB
* Sigma1278b_YPD
* background_YNB
* background_YPD

with each of this being present multiple times, corresponding to the
number of replicates. If your platereader software does not support
labelling of wells you can adjust these later using GATHODE.

After finishing your experiment with the plate reader, export the data.

TECAN
~~~~~

Export the in ASCII format (:menuselection:`Data Handling -> Data
export -> Export to ASCII file...`). Make sure to use the export
options *Direction: Horizontal*, *Result: Table (well data in
columns), Add kinetic time stamps*.

.. image:: _static/screenshots/tecanExportOptions.*
   :scale: 64%
   :alt: TECAN export

Use the *Point* as *Decimal character* and *Tab* as *Delimiter* in the
second option window.

.. image:: _static/screenshots/tecanAsciiOptions.*
   :scale: 68%
   :alt: TECAN export


Bioscreen C
~~~~~~~~~~~

Export the data as plain text. :samp:`{sample}` and
:samp:`{condition}` labels can be adjusted after importing the data
into GATHODE.

(More detailed instructions will be added to this section once we get
access to a Bioscreen C platereader.)

Other platereaders
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you have access to a different platereader, we would be happy if
you could provide us with the files that can be exported by the
accompanying software. We will then be able to write an import
function for GATHODE and adjust this documentation. For further
information contact the `developer <nils.christian@uni.lu>`_.


Use GATHODE
-----------

Start GATHODE and open the file exported from the platereader
(:menuselection:`File --> Open`). Note that it is not necessary to run
GATHODE on the same computer as the plate reader software, any modern
computer should be able to run GATHODE.

.. image:: _static/screenshots/gatopen.*
   :scale: 73%
   :alt: Open Dialog


.. _gatmetadata:

Adjust labels
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In case your platereader does not support assigning labels to the
wells or you want to change the labels, you can do this by selecting
:menuselection:`File --> Save metadata`. You will be prompted for a
file name to save the currently existing metadata
(i.e. :samp:`{sample}` and :samp:`{condition}`). You can then edit the
metadata in a spreadsheet editor (e.g `LibreOffice Calc` or `Microsoft
Excel`), where the spreadsheet layout mimics the layout of the
plate. After saving your changes to the spreadsheet (make sure you
save the data in the `CSV`-format), you can import the metadata by
selecting :menuselection:`File --> Load metadata`.

Analyse data
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the data is loaded, the replicates are grouped according to the
scheme mentioned above, with the background OD for the corresponding
condition automatically subtracted. You will see an overview figure of
all optical density time series, and on the left of the main window
you are able to choose the replicates of the different
sample-condition pairs from a list.

.. image:: _static/screenshots/gatoverview.*
   :scale: 45%
   :alt: Overview after opening a file

The extraction of properties depends on certain parameters. In
GATHODE, some parameters are defined for the whole plate (such as the
high density correction coefficients or the fit-window size), whereas
other parameters can have plate-wide defaults which can be overridden
for each replicate or even each single well (examples are the cutoff
values for the maximal growth rate). The plate-wide parameters can
only be edited if no replicate or single well is selected. For more
details on setting parameters have a look at the corresponding chapter
in the :ref:`documentation <changing parameters>`.

Once the parameters are adjusted, you can browse through the
replicates by clicking on the entries in the list, and by clicking on
the arrow next to a sample you can expand the list to see each
individual well. In the expanded list you can deselect certain wells
to mark them as outliers and exclude them from the calculations of
replicate properties.

.. image:: _static/screenshots/gattreeview.*
   :scale: 100%
   :alt: Treeview of replicates

To save the data together with the parameters, select
:menuselection:`File --> Save As`.  Similarly, the data can be loaded
(:menuselection:`File --> Open`), allowing for persistence and
reproducibility of the analysis.

You may save the figures in PDF format (:menuselection:`File -->
Export figure`), or you may save all the extracted properties such as
maximal growth rate, yield and lag time as comma-separated values
(:menuselection:`File --> Export properties`) suitable for further
processing in other programs like R or your favourite Office-Suite.
